Welcome to the Algorithmic Justice Tribunal. Today,
you serve as member of the investigative committees.
Your role is to scrutinize the
accountability of automated systems
and conduct a fact-finding inquiry
into the unlawful foundation
and exploitative purpose of the iBorderCtrl
project—an EU-funded initiative
testing experimental surveillance technologies
at the Union’s external borders.
The subject of this interrogation is
the Artificial Border Guard of iBorderCtrl
an AI system designed to conduct lie detection
and other assessments
to fully automate the classification
of individuals based on their
perceived threat potential. iBorderCtrl operates
within a broader EU research
framework known as Horizon. The testing of high-risk
surveillance and AI technologies
on migrants and refugees raises significant
ethical concerns.
Yet, even the latest EU AI Act guidelines,
published on February 2, 2025,
fail to adequately address these issues,
leaving dangerous gaps in regulation.
The absence of clear regulations does not mean
the absence of harm—only the absence of accountability.
As member of the investigative committees,
you now have the opportunity
to direct five questions
to the summoned entity.